Duncan Owen How we made it in Africa’s Due Diligence series asks top players in Africa’s private equity industry about how they are mastering the art and science of profitable dealmaking and fundraising. Doing the due diligence on those who do due diligence for a living. This article is published in association with Africa Private Equity News, a one-stop source for industry-related information. Stay up to date by downloading the free Africa Private Equity News app: Android | iOS | Scan QR code from desktop *** Phatisa is an African private equity fund manager that invests throughout sub-Saharan Africa. The firm currently has two sector-specific funds under management: the African Agriculture Fund (AAF) and the Pan African Housing Fund (PAHF), totalling over US$285m. The successor food fund, Phatisa Food Fund 2, is targeting $300m and achieved a first close in October 2018. Michael Avery asked joint managing partner, Duncan Owen, about the firm’s investment philosophy and the biggest misconception about his job. We look to invest in outstanding management teams: entrepreneurial, a solid track record, running profitable businesses with positive EBITDA and PAT (profit after tax) and minimal debt. This allows us to make an initial capital investment and offer significant follow-on opportunities. The cost of a bad deal is more than poor financial returns. It is demoralising, energy sapping and distracts the team for an inordinate period of time. The entire firm should make time for honest robust debate before committing to any transaction. There is always an element of doubt in each investment; the doubters in the investment process should be heard patiently and their doubts explored thoroughly. Investment in technology aimed at agriculture and personal finance have huge potential. For Africa to leapfrog further into the future we need aggressive investment in innovation and technology aimed at agriculture and financial products. Private equity is not a glamorous Dragons’ Den existence. The reality is that you are in the trenches battling for every gain. Here at Phatisa, we all have a deep passion for Africa and positively impacting its people and that is what keeps us going. No regrets so far. We have invested where we wanted to and walked away from overpriced competitive processes. My top five: