 PRESS OFFICE: AVCA On the back of successful industry gatherings in Abidjan, Accra, Addis Ababa, Cairo, Cape Town, and Lagos, the pan-African industry association continues to showcase the fastest-growing economies in the world by convening the industry in Morocco this April. Global and African dignitaries, investors, and business-leaders will discuss the latest developments affecting diverse industries and geographies within the private equity ecosystem. Hosted by AVCA, the agenda incorporates experienced industry perspectives from the likes of CDC Group, Coronation Capital, DLA Piper, and Verod Capital. The landmark occasion will involve keynote addresses, panel discussions, investor and portfolio company spotlights, and roundtables from the following: Locating the summit in Morocco ­reflects the tremendous growth that has taken place in North Africa over the past few years and highlights the country’s favourable business environment and powerful economy. Morocco accounts for the region’s largest share of private equity investments and following re-entry into the African Union (AU), Marrakech serves as the ideal location to celebrate the 15th anniversary of AVCA’s Conference. The conference will focus on investment prospects within Africa, the continent’s infrastructure needs, how development finance institutions are supporting SMEs, start-ups as well as VC firms investing in them, new narratives driving the continent’s transformation, the rise of family offices looking to Africa, how African private equity funds are delivering alpha, sustainability and impact investing, and value creation via exits – all unique perspectives from a diverse range of investors shaping the industry and landscape. Note: Media will have full access to all conference sessions over the two days and will be able to interview speakers and sponsors. Media facilities, food and refreshments are provided. Please note that this does not include closed door sessions. What: The 15th annual AVCA Conference, consisting of a comprehensive programme of high level speakers and moderators who will cover key market trends, industry updates, and sector insights. More information on the conference is available here. When: 22-24 April 2018 Where: Mövenpick Hotel Mansour Eddahbi, Marrakech, Morocco About AVCA AVCA is a pan-African industry body which promotes private investment in Africa. AVCA’s diverse membership is united by a common purpose: to be part of the Africa growth story. With a global and growing member base, AVCA members span private equity and venture capital firms, institutional investors, foundations and endowments, pension funds, international development finance institutions, professional service firms, academia, and other associations. To register to attend the conference as a journalist, please contact: Myriam Karbal
Email: myriamkarbal@gmail.com
Tel: +212 621 535 903 Theo Cooke
Email: tcooke@africapractice.com
Tel: + 44 (0)7825 867 962 For all other enquiries, please contact: Email: conference@avca-africa.org
Tel: +44 (0)20 3874 7008 www.avcaconference.com