 Nigerian-based StartCredits is an online loan comparison platform that helps users find the most competitive interest rates in their chosen loan category. StartCredits is the first business to offer this service in the Nigerian market. The company also builds proprietary credit risk models for financial institutions and platforms, to help facilitate lending to underserved, qualified borrowers. StartCredit founder, Rahmon Ojukotola (28), briefly outline a few aspects of his business to How we made it in Africa, and why he believes mistakes are learning opportunities. 1. How did you finance your start-up? I initially bootstrapped the company with savings I had built up during my time working in the banking industry. I also raised funds from friends and family. I decided to bootstrap because I wanted to launch without the delays associated with external seed funding and also because I felt my research could instantly contribute to the mission of promoting financial inclusion in Africa. We are in talks with a number of tech-focused VCs for the next round of funding. 2. If you were given US$1m to invest in your company now, where would it go? The investment would be evenly split between the sales & marketing department and the research & development department. We are developing risk models that utilises validated social network data of borrowers, and we would benefit from hiring a few more data scientists in the lab. Coming from a banking background, I will raise funds only when needed for positive NPV projects. 3. What risks does your business face? StartCredits is disrupting traditional consumer credit decision processes in Africa with innovative ways to measure credit risk, as such it will take educating of both loan providers and borrowers to overcome the resistance to change and to understand the benefits of increased access to credit. Another key risk is the relative high cost of data for Nigerians to access the internet. This limits the pace at which our potential users can reach our services. 4. So far, what has proven to be the most successful form of marketing? Whilst our digital marketing has been productive, its our targeted direct marketing that has proven most successful. Our marketing and products are helping to shift the borrowing habits of Nigerians online, where there is greater price discovery and transparency. 5. Describe your most exciting entrepreneurial moment. That would be right at the very beginning, when I decided to leave my banking job to set up a FinTech business in Nigeria, where the technology sector is not as established as other markets. I still remember the feeling, it was surreal, due to the fact that early in my career I had been very risk averse and would not imagine making such a decision. 6. What has been the biggest mistake you have made in your start-up, and what have you learnt from it? Where do I start. I have made so many mistakes in every aspect of business – such as marketing, R&D, sales and hiring – that it’s hard to keep count. I feel mistakes are part of the learning process when starting a new venture. I always say to myself when something goes wrong that “you win some and you learn some”. There are positives to be gained from mistakes. One [mistake] that comes to mind was in the execution of printing our first complementary cards. The dreadful print quality reflected poorly on the business and I had to withdraw all cards from distribution. The lesson from the incident taught me to pay closer attention to the whole process when dealing with suppliers.