NJ Ayuk, chairman of the Africa Energy Chamber PRESS OFFICE: African Energy Chamber Africa Oil & Power, the continent’s premier platform for energy investment and policy, and the African Energy Chamber (AEC) signed a strategic partnership in Johannesburg yesterday. Both organisations will be sharing capacities to facilitate investments and deal-making in Africa across their networks. Under the agreement, the AEC will also become an official partner of the Africa Oil & Power 2018 conference taking place September 5-7, 2018 in Cape Town. As part of the partnership, the Africa Energy Chamber is extending to all its members and partners across its network an exclusive discount of 15% to attend the summit in Cape Town from September 5-7, 2018. “As the AEC, we always encourage all our members to seek new partners and investors and expand their horizons to support their growth across the continent. We believe Africa Oil & Power is a perfect platform for them to do that,” explained NJ Ayuk, the chamber’s chairman. As a prestigious international forum to take place in Cape Town this fall, Africa Oil & Power is an ideal place to strike business deals and meet investors. For its third edition, Africa Oil & Power has put together a prestigious programme with 15 African petroleum and power ministers confirmed to date, 600 C-level delegates and 75+ speakers from across the continent, Europe, Asia, and the Americas spanning the entire value chain, from upstream to power generation. As Africa’s energy sector enters a new phase of growth and oil prices stabilise around $70, AOP and the AEC have expressed their excitement over this new collaboration which capitalizes on renewed optimism across Africa’s investment community. Guillaume Doane, the CEO of Africa Oil & Power, said: “The vision of Africa Oil & Power and the Africa Energy Chamber are the same – to combine a pro-African attitude with a pan-African influence. We are excited to have access to their extensive African energy network.” About the Africa Energy Chamber Headquartered in Johannesburg, the African Energy Chamber (AEC) is a progressive business network that promotes business and investment opportunities within the continent by connecting local corporations, foreign investors, and ministerial parties. The AEC unites African interests and aspirations under one voice that advocates for Africa’s companies and citizens and gives the continent a conscience on the global energy stage. From local content development to universal electricity access, the AEC’s engagement aims at placing Africa at the forefront of global energy investment and transformations. www.energychamber.org