Steven Isaacson When you are running a sizable organisation with many business units, in different geographies across Africa, and a large number of employees, even when the overall business is directionally positive, there is always something to worry about that’s keeping you up at night. Interestingly, I do believe that sleeping on a problem often helps the brain come up with the ideal solution. People think as CEO you have the authority, and power to do as you please, but in reality, you are more accountable than anyone else to ultimately deliver the business. Your responsibility is not just to shareholders, but your management team and your employees. In my twenties, I was fortunate to get a position working directly for an extremely successful global entrepreneur. He taught me the key business principles that still guide me today. He was also a genius at trusting his gut to help make smart decisions. As CEO you can’t over-analyse the situation; you need to be agile when making decisions, and you have to learn to trust your gut. Very early in my career my late dad taught me that your reputation is everything, always act ethically and establish a culture in which your team members do the same. Grit, determination, passion and drive, with a little luck and a lot of gratitude. I’m a big proponent of a balance between work and play. I enjoy quality family time, as well as running and cycling. As a Jew I observe the Sabbath from sunset on Friday to sunset on Saturday, where you refrain from work activities, you don’t drive or use any electronic devices. You engage in restful activities to honour the day. People think it’s really strange, but in today’s fast-paced world, it’s quite liberating to be able to switch off your phone and spend quality time with your family and friends. I try to be at the office around 8am. By the time I get in, I’ve already spent quite a bit of time reflecting on the day ahead. I also run most mornings, which is my thinking time. I often blue-sky strategise or I’m dissecting and trying to understand the drivers of my business. Why would you want to work for us? Their response usually helps me understand if they’ll be a good culture fit for our business. I leave the technical questions to the smart guys in the room. I just want to make sure we’re hiring nice, passionate people who’ll fit our dynamic culture. I get to work with people far smarter than myself who are constantly teaching me new things and challenging me to be the best that I can be. In turn, as CEO I get the opportunity of growing others and bringing out the full potential of our employees. Watching people grow and develop within our company, is the most rewarding part of my job. Steven Isaacson is CEO of Kevro Holdings, a value-add supplier of corporate and promotional apparel, and other brandable products. Kevro owns several well-known brands, including BARRON.